Twenty-three-year-old Lalita Benbansi sits in the waiting room of a dimly lit doctor’s clinic in Grant Road, one of the oldest neighbourhoods in Mumbai. She wears an indigo-dyed hospital gown and a thin shawl that does little to conceal her injuries. She is scheduled to undergo surgery on her nose the next day, scarred and swollen to twice its original size by an acid attack over two years ago.

With approximately 25 medical procedures behind her, Lalita is approaching the midway point of her treatment plan. Her doctor says she will need about 30 more to repair the damage, including recreating her ears, which the acid melted off. These are aimed only at restoring functionality and preventing infection; the question of cosmetic procedures remains a far-off uncertainty.

Lalita’s quick grin and ebullience dim as she describes the series of events that led to her attack.

In 2012, she and her mother travelled to her maternal village in the north Indian state of Uttar Pradesh to attend the wedding of a relative. After a rowdy bout of drinking, a quarrel broke out within the family, particularly enraging an 18-year-old cousin of Lalita’s. A small disagreement quickly took on a much darker hue.

“I pushed a girl who my cousin had brought along to the wedding, and was refusing to pay a token auspicious amount at the altar. He took this as the final insult from my family and swore revenge,” she explains. Taunting her for the pride she took in her appearance, he threatened to throw acid on her. “At the time I thought it was just something said in the heat of the moment, but he actually made good on his threat,” she says, her voice still heavy with disbelief.

Five months later, on November 11, 2012, as Lalita and her mother were walking out to the fields to relieve themselves after dark, two men wearing masks approached her, tackled her to the ground and poured acid on her face while her mother watched, horrified. Lalita says she was able to recognise her cousin’s voice and his eyes when she shone a torch in his face.

Advertisement
Lalita was admitted to a local hospital for two months to treat her burns, but the family quickly ran out of savings. Lalita’s father Anand, who works as a petrol pump attendant in Mumbai, says with an air of defeat: “I make Rs 4,500 ($69) a month, out of which Rs 1,500 ($22) just goes on rent. How was I supposed to pay for such a long stay in hospital?”

After spending many months in despair at her grandmother’s house, without receiving any treatment for her grievous injuries, a relative convinced Lalita to return to Mumbai, where the acid survivors NGO Make Love Not Scars raised funds for further medical care.

On average, a survivor of a medium intensity attack requires at least 15 to 20 surgeries explains Dr Ashok Gupta, who has operated on more than 150 victims of acid violence over his 35 years as a plastic surgeon.

With the cost of each surgery averaging Rs 2-4 lakhs (about $3,000 to $6,000), treatments can be prohibitively expensive. “I’ve heard of some hospitals charging as much as Rs 6 lakhs ($9,000) for a minor procedure,” says Gupta indignantly. Against these daunting expenses, the apex court’s order to the government to provide a compensation amount of Rs 3 lakhs ($4,500) per victim is woefully insufficient.

Government hospitals and emergency rooms are also ill-equipped to deal with acid attacks. “Special neutralising agents that can be applied immediately to limit the damage are scarcely stocked in most emergency rooms and ambulances. It all ties into the absence of a basic national advisory body of experts to suggest guidelines for actions in case of an attack,” says Gupta.

Advertisement
When acid is thrown on a person’s face, the eyelids and lips may burn off completely. The nose may melt, closing the nostrils, and the ears shrivel up. Skin and bone on the skull, forehead, cheeks and chin may dissolve. When the acid splashes or drips over the neck, chest, back, arms or legs, it burns every inch of the skin it touches.

When the wounds from an acid burn heal, they form thick scars that pull the skin tight and cause disfigurement. In 90 percent of cases, the eyesight of the victim is adversely affected, causing blindness. And then there is the psychological trauma. With a high survival rate among victims, acid attacks are rarely carried out with murder in mind. They are intended to disfigure and mutilate – to condemn the victim to a lifetime of suffering.

Lately Lalita has been arguing with her parents about getting a job as soon as her surgeries are completed.

“They aren’t going to be around forever and I need to fend for myself,” she says. “Before this, I was extremely shy and barely spoke a word to anyone. I don’t have that luxury anymore.”